The Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP) is a classic problem in combinatoric optimization: given a set of nodes (cities, customers, bikes), find the shortest path that visits them all once. The TSP comes in many flavors, according to various real-world operations constraints: customers may need to be visited in specific time intervals, or there may be multiple vehicles to route, for example. 

In Portland we recently had a scooter pilot program, and people were paid by the scooter operators to pick up scooters with low battery and charge them. If picking up every scooter is impossible, the task is to pick up as many as possible and find the most efficient route between them. If shift length is not a constraint, the problem is the TSP; with shift length, the problem is finding the largest-possible subset of scooters for which the TSP solution is shorter than the shift length. This problem has analogues with dockless bikeshare, for example: bikes need monthly inspections and maintenance, and they can’t all be visited in one shift. 

This TSP and its variants are NP-hard problems, meaning that no efficient method for finding the optimal solution exists: even for problems of size 30, heuristics need to be used as the solution space is so large it’s impossible to search every possible solution. Heuristics used for the TSP include tabu search, simulated annealing, ant colony optimization, and genetic algorithms. I used a genetic algorithm (GA) for this problem because the flexibility that Gas provide. 

Genetic algorithms were first invented in 1975, and rely on processes similar to biological natural selection to efficiently search the solution space and identify ‘good’ solutions. Starting with a diverse population of solutions, GAs apply operators such as crossover and mutations to alter the solutions in the subsequent populations. By selecting only the best solutions at each step, better and better solutions are found.    
